The Project Gutenberg eBook of Proxy Planeteers, by Edmond Hamilton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Proxy Planeteers

Author: Edmond Hamilton

Release Date: August 2, 2022 [eBook #68669]

Language: English

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROXY PLANETEERS ***





                           PROXY PLANETEERS

                          By EDMOND HAMILTON

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                     Startling Stories, July 1947.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Doug Norris hesitated for an instant. He knew that another movement
might well mean disaster.

Here deep in the cavernous interior of airless Mercury, catastrophe
could strike suddenly. The rocks of the fissure he was following had a
temperature of hundreds of degrees. And he could hear the deep rumble
of shifting rock, close by.

But it was not these dangers of the infernal underworld that made him
hesitate. It was that sixth sense of imminent peril that he had felt
twice before while exploring the Mercurian depths. Each time, it had
ended disastrously.

"Just nerves," Norris muttered to himself. "The uranium vein is clearly
indicated. I've got to follow it."

As he again moved forward and followed that thin, black stratum in the
fissure wall, his eyes constantly searched ahead.

Then a half-dozen little clouds of glowing gas flowed toward him from a
branching fissure. Each was several feet in diameter, a faint-glowing
mass of vapor with a brighter core.

Norris moved hastily to avoid them. But there was a sudden flash of
light. Then everything went black before his eyes.

"It's happened to me again!" Doug Norris thought in sharp dismay.

Frantically he jiggled his controls, cut in emergency power switches,
overloaded his tight control beam to the limit. It was no use. He still
could not see or hear anything whatever.

Norris defeatedly took the heavy television helmet with its bulging
eyepieces off his head. He stared at the control-board, then looked
blankly out the window at the distant, sunlit stacks of New York Power
Station.

"Another Proxy gone! Seven of them wrecked in the last two weeks!"

It hadn't just happened, of course. It had happened eight minutes ago.
It took that long for the television beam from the Proxy to shuttle
from Mercury to this control-station outside New York. And it took as
long again for the Proxy control-beam to get back to it on Mercury.

Sometimes, a time-lag that long could get a Proxy into trouble before
its operator on Earth was aware of it. But usually that was not a big
factor of danger on a lifeless world like Mercury. The Proxies, built
of the toughest refractory metals, could stand nearly anything but an
earthquake, and keep on functioning.

"Each time, there's been no sign of falling rocks or anything like
that," Norris told himself, mystified. "Each time, the Proxy has just
blacked out with all its controls shot."

       *       *       *       *       *

Then, as his mind searched for some factor common to all the disasters,
a startled look came over Doug Norris' lean, earnest face.

"There _were_ always some of those clouds of radon or whatever they
are around, each time!" he thought. "I wonder if--" A red-hot thought
brought him to his feet. "Holy cats! Maybe I've got the answer!"

He jumped away from the Proxy-board without a further glance at that
bank of intricate controls, and hurried down a corridor.

Through the glass doors he passed, Norris could see the other operators
at work. Each sat in front of his control-board, wearing his television
helmet, flipping the switches with expert precision. Each was operating
a mechanical Proxy somewhere on Mercury.

Norris and all these other operators had been trained together when
Kincaid started the Proxy Project. They had been proud of their
positions, until recently. It _was_ a vitally important job, searching
out the uranium so sorely needed for Earth's atomic power supply.

The uranium and allied metals of Earth had years ago been ransacked
and used up. There was little on Venus or Mars. Mercury had much of
the precious metal in its cavernous interior. But no man, no matter
how ingenious his protection, could live long enough on the terrible,
semi-molten Hot Side of Mercury to conduct mining operations.

That was why Kincaid had invented the Proxies. They were machines
that could mine uranium where men couldn't go. Crewless ships guided
by radar took the Proxies to the Base on Mercury's sunward side. From
Base, each Proxy was guided by an Earth operator down into the hot
fissures to find and mine the vital radioactive element. The scheme had
worked well, until--

"Until we got into those deeper fissures with the Proxies," Doug Norris
thought. "Seven wrecked since then! This _must_ be the answer!"

Martin Kincaid looked up sharply as Norris entered his office. A look
of faint dismay came on Kincaid's square, patient face. He knew that
a Proxy operator wouldn't leave his board in the middle of a shift,
unless there was trouble.

"Go ahead and give me the bad news, Doug," he said wearily.

"Proxy M-Fifty just blacked out on me, down in Fissure Four," Norris
admitted. "Just like the others. But I think I know why, now!" He
continued excitedly: "Mart, seven Proxies blacking out in two weeks
wasn't just accident. It was done deliberately!"

Kincaid stared. "You mean that Hurriman's bunch is somehow sabotaging
our Project?"

Doug Norris interrupted with a denial. "Not that. Hurriman and his
fellow politicians merely want to get their hands on the Proxy Project,
not to destroy it."

"Then who did wreck our Proxies?" Kincaid demanded.

Norris answered excitedly. "I believe we've run into living creatures
in those depths, and they're attacking us."

Kincaid grunted. "The temperature in those fissures is about four
hundred degrees Centigrade, the same as Mercury's sunward side. Life
can't exist in heat like that. I suggest you take a rest."

"I know all that," Norris said impatiently. "But suppose we've run into
a new kind of life there--one based on radioactive matter? Biologists
have speculated on it more than once. Theoretically, creatures of
radioactive matter could exist, drawing their energies not from
chemical metabolism as we do, but from the continuous process of
radioactive disintegration."

"Theoretically, the sky is a big roof with holes in it that are stars,"
growled Kincaid. "It depends on whose theory you believe."

"Every time a Proxy has blacked out down there, there's been little
clouds of heavy radioactive gas near," argued Doug Norris. "Each seems
to have a denser core. Suppose that core is an unknown radium compound,
evolved into some kind of neuronic structure that is able to receive
and remember stimuli? A sort of queer, radioactive brain?

"If that's so, and biologists have said it's possible, the _body_ of
the creature consists of radon gas emanated from the radium core. You
remember the half-life of radon exactly equals the rate of its emission
from radium, so there'd be a constant equilibrium of the thing's
gaseous body, analogous to our blood circulation. Given Mercury's
conditions, it's no more impossible than a jellyfish or a man here on
Earth!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Kincaid looked skeptical.

"And you think these hypothetical living Raddies of yours are attacking
our Proxies? Why would they?"

"If they have cognition and correlation faculties they might be
irritated by the tube emanations from the control-boxes of our
Proxies," Norris suggested. "They get into those control-boxes and
wreck the tube circuits by overloading the electron flow with their own
Beta radiation!"

"It's all pretty far-fetched," muttered his superior. "Radioactive
life! But all those Proxies blowing can't be just chance." He paused,
then added gloomily, "But I can just see myself telling a World Council
committee that your hypothetical living Raddies are what keep us from
delivering uranium! Hurriman would like that. It would convince the
Council that I'm as incompetent as he claims."

"He'll convince the Council of that anyway unless we deliver uranium
from Mercury quickly," retorted Norris. "And we'll never do it till
we get these Raddies licked. They're basically just complex clouds of
radioactive gas. A Proxy armed with a high-pressure gas hose should be
able to blow them to rags. Can't we try it, Mart?"

Kincaid sighed, and stood up.

"I was a practical man once," he said wearily, "and would have booted
you out of here if you'd suggested such stuff. But I'm a drowning man
right now, so I'll buy your straw. We'll send down a couple of Proxies
armed with gas hoses and see how they make out."

Doug Norris eagerly went with his superior into the adjoining room
where the operators of the Base Proxies were on duty.

"Norris and I will take over two Proxies at base," Kincaid told the
sub-chief there.

Two operators took off their helmets and got out of their chairs.
Norris took the place of one, donning the television helmet.

The control and television beams were on. The compact kinescope tubes
in his helmet gave him a clear vision of the Base on Mercury, as seen
through his Proxy's iconoscope "eyes".

There were no buildings, for Proxies didn't need shelter. The seared
black rocks stretched under a brazen sky, beneath a stupendous Sun
whose blaze even the iconoscope filters couldn't cut down much. The
Base was just a flat area here beside the low rock hills. A crewless
ship lay to one side, its hatches open. Near it were the supply-dumps
of Proxy parts, the repair shops, the power plant.

"We'll get a couple of oxygen tanks from the supply dump and use them
for your gas hose weapons," Kincaid was saying.

The Proxies they were guiding did not look like men. They looked like
what they were--machines devised for special purposes. They were like
baby tanks, mounted on caterpillar drives, each with two big jointed
arms ending in claws, and a control-box with iconoscope eyes. They
clamped on the high-pressure oxygen tanks, clutched the nozzles of the
attached hoses, and rolled out of Base across the seared plain toward
the black rock hills. In a few minutes, they entered the narrow cleft
of Fissure Four.

Norris knew the way down here. He led, switching on his searchlight
even though he didn't really need it. The Proxy's iconoscope eyes could
see by the infra-red radiation from the superheated rock walls.

They finally reached the spot deep down in the fissure where his
disabled former Proxy still stood. Doug Norris reached his jointed arms
and quickly unclamped the shield of its control-box.

"Look there, Mart! The whole control's shot! They do it by overloading
the tubes with their own Beta emanations, all right."

Kincaid's Proxy had elbowed close, its big iconoscope eyes peering
closely. Here in the office, Kincaid uttered a grunt.

"That still doesn't prove the gas that did it was living. Instead of
your hypothetical Raddies, it could be--"

"Look there!" yelled Doug Norris suddenly. "There they come again!"

Three of the glowing gaseous things were flowing toward them along the
fissure. They poised for a moment in a lifelike way, and then swept
forward.

"Your gas hose!" yelled Norris to the man beside him. "Don't let them
get near you!"

The Raddies were advancing in a deliberate way. In spite of the
time-lag, Norris tried to raise his gas hose and trigger it. There
wasn't time. The eight-minute lag between his action and the result out
there on Mercury was fatally long. The glowing Raddies were flowing up
around the Proxies.

Doug Norris was momentarily dazzled by the brilliance of the Raddy that
enveloped his Proxy's control-box. It was like looking into a star to
look into the glowing, pulsing core of the thing.

His senses reeled queerly as he stared, hypnotized by the swirling
bright gas and the starlike, throbbing core. He sensed dimly that
that core was a kind of life possible on no terrestrial planet,
a crystalized gaseous neurone structure that used its own radon
emanations as a body.

       *       *       *       *       *

He felt his senses staggering, darkening. It was as though he were
hypnotized by the brilliance of that pulsing core of light, as though
it were probing excruciatingly into his brain.

Then Doug Norris came out of his queer daze to find himself sitting
there with his helmet dead. He could see nothing. His movements of the
Proxy controls yielded no response.

"Blacked out, both our Proxies!" Kincaid exclaimed, dazedly taking off
his own helmet. "And we got some kind of kick-back shock."

Norris, still badly shaken, nodded unsteadily. "There must have been a
kick-back along the control beam when they blew the control-boxes. The
circuit breakers may have been slow." He added quickly, "But you know
now I was right! Those Raddies are living things, that instinctively
attack our Proxies!"

Kincaid frowned. "It looks like it. But no gas hose or any other
weapon will work against the brutes. The time-lag makes it impossible
to use weapons. Our only chance is to seal and ray-proof the Proxies'
control-boxes against them. That'll take time. But it's our only chance
to get uranium out of there, and it's got to be done before Hurriman's
clique gets the Council on our tail. I'll have the boys bring the
Proxies all back to Base at once."

Norris followed his chief back to his office. Winters, the office
clerk, was waiting there for them, and looking anxious.

"A bulletin just came over the news tape, Chief," he told Kincaid.
"Here it is."

Mart Kincaid read the tape, and his square shoulders seemed to sag a
little. He looked at them heavily.

"We won't need to worry any more about your Raddies, Doug. World
Council has just passed Hurriman's motion requesting an immediate
investigation of Proxy Project. It will begin tomorrow." He added
tonelessly, "You know what that means. When they find we've lost nine
valuable Proxies out there on Mercury without getting any uranium at
all yet, we'll be thrown out."

"Blast Hurriman!" Doug Norris raged. "The Proxy Project has been your
work from the start! You sweated to develop the things. Now because
there's a hitch, a bunch of bumbling politicians take it over!"

"It's all in a lifetime," Kincaid shrugged. "Winters, you tell the
boys. Have them pull their Proxies back to Base, and go home." He sat
down slowly in his chair then, and stared at the wall. "So it's over.
Well, right now I'm too tired to care."

Norris felt heartsick. "Isn't there any chance of stalling them long
enough to try our idea of rayproofing the Proxies?"

"You know there isn't," said his superior. "It'd take days to do that
job. Even if it worked against the Raddies, it'd take weeks more to
get out uranium. And Hurriman's bunch won't wait weeks."

He looked at the sick face of the younger man, then opened a desk
drawer and took out a bottle of Scotch and glasses.

"Here, have a drink," he ordered. "You're a little young yet, and you
take these things too seriously."

Norris unhappily drank the Scotch. But his nerves, still shaken by that
queer kick-back shock from the beam, didn't relax much.

"Mart, your calmness isn't fooling me," he said. "I know how much the
Proxies meant to you, the dreams you had of operating Proxies on every
planet man couldn't visit, even on worlds of distant stars."

Kincaid shrugged as he poured himself a drink. "Sure, I wanted
all that. But since when have scientists ever been able to buck
politicians?"

Darkness pressed the windows as night gathered. They sat silently in
the darkening office drinking the Scotch and looking at the tall,
lighted stacks of the distant New York Power Station.

Doug Norris found no comfort in the liquor's sting. His sense of
injustice deepened. The Proxies were Kincaid's, but just because he
couldn't produce uranium fast enough, they would be taken away from him.

He said so, bitterly and at length. Kincaid only shrugged wearily again.

"Forget it, Doug. Have another drink."

Norris discovered with mild surprise that the bottle was empty.

"We must have spilled some of it," he said a little thickly.

"There's another bottle in the drawer," Kincaid grunted. "They were for
the Project party next week, but that's all off now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Norris opened the other bottle and generously refilled their glasses.
He sat down beside Kincaid, who was looking broodingly from the window
at the distant atomic power plant. Despite the warm physical glow he
felt, Doug Norris was unhappier than before. A new, poignant sorrow had
risen in him.

"You know, Mart, it isn't only what Hurriman's doing to the Project
that's got me down," he said sorrowfully. "It's what happened to old
M-Fifty today."

"M-Fifty?" Kincaid inquired. "You mean that Proxy you lost this
afternoon?"

"Yes, he was my special Proxy for all these months," Doug Norris said.
"I got to know him. He was always dependable, never jumped his control
beam, never acted cranky in a tight place." His voice choked a little.
"I loved that Proxy like a brother. And I let him down. I let those
Raddies wreck him."

"They'll fix him up, Doug," said Kincaid, a rich sympathy in his
slightly thickened voice. "They'll make him as good as new when they
get him back up to Base."

"Yes, but what good will that do if I'm not here to operate him?" cried
Norris. "I tell you, that Proxy was sensitive. He knew my touch on the
controls. That Proxy would have died for me."

"Sure he would." Kincaid nodded with owlish understanding. "Here, have
another drink, Doug."

"I've had enough," Norris said gloomily, refilling their glasses as
he spoke. "But as I was saying, that Proxy won't run for a bunch of
politicians and their ham-handed operators like he ran for me. He'll
know that I'm gone, and he won't be the same. He'll pine."

"That's the way it goes, Doug," Kincaid said sadly. "You lose your best
friend--I mean, your best Proxy--and I lose my Project, just because we
can't furnish enough uranium for power over there."

He gestured bitterly toward the distant stacks of New York Power
Station that soared like towers of light in the distant darkness.

"You know, I've got an idea in my mind about that," Kincaid added
slowly, as he stared at those towers.

Doug Norris nodded emphatically. "You're dead right, Mart. You're
absolutely right."

"Now wait, you didn't hear my idea yet," Kincaid protested a little
foggily. "It's this--we're losing the Project because we can't furnish
enough uranium for power. But suppose they didn't need uranium for
power any longer? Then they'd let us keep the Proxy Project!"

"Exactly what _I_ say!" Norris declared firmly. "There's just one thing
for us to do. That's to find a way to produce atomic power from some
commoner substance than uranium. That'd solve our whole problem."

"I thought I was the one who said that," Kincaid said, puzzled. "But
look--what fairly common metal could be used to replace uranium in the
atomic piles?"

"Bismuth, of course," Norris replied promptly. "Its atomic number is
closest to the radioactive series of elements."

"You took the words right out of my mouth!" Kincaid declared. "Bismuth
it is. All we have to do is to make bismuth work in an atomic pile,
then we can run the Proxy Project without this everlasting nagging
about supplying uranium."

Doug Norris felt a warm, happy relief. "Why, it's simple! We should
have thought of it before! Let's get some bismuth out of the supply
room and go over to the Power Station right now!" He leaped to his
feet, eagerly, if a trifle unsteadily. "No time to waste, if the
Council committee's to be on our necks tomorrow!"

Doug Norris felt like singing in his wonderful relief, as he and
Kincaid went down through the now deserted Project building to the
supply room. In fact, he started to raise his voice in a ribald ballad
about a Proxy's adventure with a lady automaton.

"You mus' have had a trifle too much Scotch, Doug," Kincaid reproved
him, with owlish dignity. "Such levity isn't becoming to two scientists
about to make the mos' wonderful invention of the century."

They got one of the heavy leaden cylinders used for transport of
uranium and filled it carefully with powdered bismuth. Then, in
Kincaid's car, they drove happily toward the big Power Station.

The guards at the barrier gate knew them both, for it was nothing new
for Proxy Project men to bring uranium over to the Station. They let
them through, and the car eased along the straight cement road.

The huge, windowless buildings that housed the massive uranium piles
were a mile beyond. But no one went near those tremendous atomic piles.
Everything in them had to be handled by remote control by the few
technicians in Headquarters Building who kept them operating.

"Mart, isn't it queer nobody ever thought of usin' bismuth instead of
uranium, before now?" Norris asked, out of his roseate glow.

"Scientists too c'nservative, that's the trouble," Kincaid answered
wisely. His voice soared. "We're about to launch a new epoch! No more
uranium shortage to worry 'bout! No more politicians botherin' the
Project!"

"And I'll be able to fix up old M-Fifty and run him myself again,"
added Doug Norris. He choked up once more. "When I think of that Proxy
that was like a brother to me, lyin' down in that lonely fissure with
the Raddies gloatin' over him--"

"Don't think about it, Doug," begged Kincaid, with tender sympathy.
"Soon's we get these atomic piles changed around, we'll go back and get
good old M-Fifty up again and fix him good as new."

       *       *       *       *       *

That promise cheered Norris' grieving mind. He got out and helped
Kincaid carry the heavy lead cylinder into Headquarters Building.

The technicians they passed in the lower rooms saw nothing surprising
in the two Project men staggering along under the weight of the
cylinder. Nor did Petersen and Thorpe, at first.

Petersen and Thorpe were the two technicians on duty in the big, sacred
inmost chamber of controls. Visors here gave view of every part of the
distant, mighty atomic piles--the massive lead towers that enclosed
the graphite and uranium lattices, the gas penstocks that led to giant
heat turbines, the gauges and meters. And the banks of heavy levers
here could switch those lattices, make any desired change in the piles,
without the necessity of a man entering the zone of dangerous radiation.

Petersen had surprise on his spectacled, scholarly face as he greeted
the two scientists.

"I didn't know you had another uranium consignment for us," he said.

Kincaid helped Norris place the lead cylinder in the breech of the tube
that would carry it mechanically to the distant pile.

"This isn't uranium--it's better than uranium," Kincaid announced
impressively.

"What do you mean, better than uranium?" Petersen asked in a puzzled
tone. He opened the end of the lead cylinder. "Why, this stuff is
bismuth! What is this, a crazy joke?"

Young Thorpe had been staring closely at Kincaid and Norris.

"They're both plastered!" he burst out.

Kincaid drew himself up in an unsteady attitude of outraged dignity.

"Tha's what thanks we get," he accused thickly. "We come here to make
a won'erful improvement in your blasted old atomic piles, and we get
insulted."

"Thorpe," Petersen said disgustedly, "get them out of here, and ...
_Look out!_"

Doug Norris had casually taken the heavy metal handle off one of the
big levers. He tapped Thorpe on the head with it just as Petersen
uttered his warning cry. The young technician slumped.

Petersen, suddenly pale, darted toward an alarm button on his desk. But
before he reached it, Norris' improvised blackjack tapped his skull.
And Petersen also sagged to the floor.

[Illustration: Before Petersen could reach the alarm button, the
blackjack hit him.]

Norris looked triumphantly at Kincaid, with a warm feeling of righteous
virtue.

"They won't bother us now, Mart. I just put them out for a little while
without hurting 'em."

"Quick thinking, Doug!" Kincaid approved warmly. "Can't let
reactionaries obstruc' course of scientific progress. We'd better tie
'em up in case they come around too soon."

Norris helped tie the two unconscious men with lengths of spare cable.
Then he and Kincaid stood swaying a little as they owlishly inspected
the controls of the mighty atomic piles.

Norris knew a good bit about those controls. He had been here many
times, and Petersen and the other technicians had liked to talk. The
trouble was, that right now his thoughts all seemed a little foggy.

"What we got to do," Kincaid said ponderously, "is change 'round the
atomic pile setup so it'll handle bismuth instead of uranium. Right?"

"Right!" Norris approved enthusiastically. "That's going right to the
heart of the problem, old pal!"

Kincaid seemed to blush in deprecation. "Oh, I jus' got an orderly
mind. First thing now, is to shift the uranium lattices out of the
piles."

He laid his hands on several of the levers, one after another. There
was a low humming of machinery somewhere.

In the distant, towering structure, lattices loaded with uranium were
being mechanically withdrawn to the pits beneath. But there was nothing
happening here except on the panel of indicators.

Petersen came back to consciousness at that moment. Tied to a wall
stanchion, he stiffened and his eyes bugged at them.

"What are you two doing?" he cried. "You're cutting off the power by
pulling out those lattices!"

"Only temp'rarily," Norris assured him. "We'll shift empty lattices
back in, and then load the bismuth into them."

Petersen uttered a howl of agony. "You maniacs will wreck the whole
pile if you try a stunt like that! For heaven's sake, sober up and
think what you're doing!"

"We're tryin' to think," Kincaid said sternly. "But how can we
co'centrate, with you yelling at us?"

Petersen went from raging orders to agonized pleadings to tearful
entreaty. The two ignored him completely.

"Le's see, now," Kincaid said, blinking. "We'll leave in the Number
One uranium lattice after all. We'll need its neutrons to trigger the
expanding series of graphite and bismuth lattices."

"We'll need _two_ uranium lattices," Doug Norris corrected thickly.
"One to trigger the first action, the other to pr'vide neutrons for
the continuous shuttle that'll run the bismuth's atomic number up from
eighty-three to ninety-four, right up through neptunium to plutonium."

"You're right," Kincaid agreed, hiccuping slightly. "I forgot 'bout
that second lattice for a minute. Mus' be because of all the noise in
here."

       *       *       *       *       *

Petersen was still producing that noise, indeed. He had become louder
and more frantic as he saw them shifting out the uranium lattices and
replacing them clumsily with empty lattice-frames.

"Ten thousand scientists have been working ever since
Nineteen-forty-five to find a way to use common elements instead of
uranium in a pile!" he choked. "They can't do it. But two drunken Proxy
men are going to try it!"

Norris hardly heard that stream of agonized accusation and entreaty, as
he helped Kincaid shift in the empty lattices. He was mildly sorry that
Petersen felt so disturbed. There was no reason for it. He and Kincaid
knew just what they were doing.

Or did they? For a moment, a dim doubt crossed Norris' foggy mind.
After all, he and Kincaid weren't physicists. Then he dismissed that
doubt. He was _sure_ of what they were doing, wasn't he?

Kincaid sat down unsteadily when they had the lattices changed.

"I feel a li'l shaky. 'S emotional reaction from great scientific
achievement."

"Emotional reaction nothing--you're so plastered you're nearly out!"
raged Petersen.

Kincaid dignifiedly ignored that. "Switch on the loader and shoot the
ol' bismuth in there, Doug."

"Norris, _don't_ do it!" begged Petersen hoarsely. "It means wrecking
the pile, and maybe blowing up the whole Station!"

Again, Doug Norris' dim doubt bothered him. But then again he dismissed
it. Everything was so beautifully clear in his mind. It had to work.

He switched on the loader. The lead cylinder of bismuth slid away
into the tube that would carry it to the pile, where it would be
automatically loaded into the new empty lattices.

"You fools!" choked Petersen. "I hope they hang you both for this! When
that pile starts up, and blows--"

The operation of the great atomic pile was automatic from this point
on. Minutes later, a bell rang and indicators clicked on.

"First uranium lattice has triggered off," said Kincaid, and nodded,
pleased. "Now we'll get power--lotsa power."

"You'll get nothing but maybe an atomic explosion, in ten seconds!"
cried Petersen, his face deathly white.

Doug Norris suddenly felt his doubt rise again and this time it
overwhelmed him! All his former foggy confidence seemed to have left
him as they completed their operations.

He was suddenly aware of the mad and ghastly thing that he and Kincaid
had done. Why in heaven's name had they done it? What crazy quirk in
their minds had made them do it?

Kincaid too was suddenly looking pale and queer.

"Doug, maybe we shouldn't have tried it."

"Look at those meters!" yelled Petersen, in a wild voice.

The technician's eyes were protruding as he stared at the big bank of
ammeters that registered the output of the great turbines. The needles
were jumping across the dials with swiftly increasing amperage.

"The pile is _working_!" yelled Petersen hoarsely. "That bismuth is
actually producing atomic power!"

Doug Norris suddenly felt cold sober, and a little sick. He sat down
shakily, and put his head in his hands.

Kincaid was staring blankly at the ammeters, while Petersen and Thorpe
seemed to have gone crazy with excitement. When Petersen was untied,
he grabbed Kincaid fiercely.

"How did you do it?" he cried. "Just what did you do to the pile?"

Kincaid stared at him blankly. "I don't know, now."

"You don't know?" Petersen almost screeched. "Man, you've stumbled on
what the scientists have been hunting all these years--the hookup to
use common elements in an atomic pile! You must have had something
figured out beforehand!"

"We didn't!" Norris denied weakly. "We got a little plastered, and got
this idea. We didn't know what we were doing."

Suddenly, Doug Norris stiffened. Remembrance that brought him jumping
unsteadily to his feet had come to him.

"You couldn't have done a thing like this by sheer crazy accident!"
Petersen was insisting. "You must have known how!"

"By heaven, I believe now that we _did_ know what we were doing, in a
queer sort of way!" Norris exclaimed shakily. He grabbed Kincaid's arm.
"Mart, come with me! We're going back over to the Project!"

Petersen's dazed amazement was changing to exultation.

"Whatever you did, it's still working and looks like it'll work
indefinitely! And we can study the hookup and learn how to duplicate
it, even if we never completely understand it. You two maniacs are
going to be famous!"

But Norris had already led the stupefied Kincaid out of the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

All the way back to the Proxy Project, Kincaid kept dazedly repeating
the same thing over and over.

"We must have been clear out of our heads to do a thing like that! But
how is it that we were able to do it _right_?"

"Haven't you suspected the answer to that yet?" cried Doug Norris.
"Don't you see why, as soon as our conscious minds were relaxed by a
few drinks, we automatically went and performed an operation totally
beyond present-day nuclear science? What happened to us just before we
had those drinks? What happened when our Proxies met those Raddies
down in the fissure?"

"The Raddies?" Kincaid repeated stupidly. "What could those brutes have
to do with this?"

"We thought they were only brutes, a low form of queer radioactive
life," Norris said. "But what if their weird minds are intelligent,
supremely intelligent? An intelligence that doesn't operate for
purposes or in ways like ours, but that's as high or higher than ours?"

He almost dragged the stunned Kincaid into the deserted office, to the
control-boards of the Proxies at Base.

"Take over a Proxy and follow me," Norris ordered. "I've an idea that
if we go down in that fissure again, we can prove it."

"Prove what?" Kincaid asked, but mechanically obeyed and took over a
Proxy control.

Again, Norris and Kincaid guided their Proxies out of Base and across
the seared Mercury plain toward Fissure Four. Norris peered down into
the fissure as he advanced. Then as they glimpsed the wrecked Proxies
they had previously left there, they also glimpsed glowing little
clouds flowing rapidly toward them.

A Raddy lifted its glowing gaseous body to envelop the control-box of
Norris' Proxy. Again, as he stared into the thing's brilliant, pulsing
core, he felt his senses reel queerly. But this time, he knew beyond
any doubt what it was.

"Hypnosis!" he yelled to Kincaid. "Hypnosis operating through our
Proxies' eyes right back along the beam to our own eyes and brains!
I thought so!" His shout died away as his brain reeled under the
powerful hypnotic influence of the Raddy's pulsing, starlike core.

Hypnosis could operate by vision, everyone knew that. Nobody had
dreamed of hypnosis operating across space by means of a linking
television beam, but it was happening. For Doug Norris, resisting now
with new-found knowledge, just dimly sensed the powerful hypnotic order
the Raddy's pulsing brain was hurling into his own mind.

"You will not send your crude machines down here again to disturb our
philosophical reveries!" the Raddy's hypnotic thought was sternly
ordering him. "There is no further need. When we read from your minds
that it was need for uranium for your primitive power plants that
motivated your intrusions here, we gave your brains the post-hypnotic
knowledge to improve those power plants so you would not need to come
here again. So go, and do not return!"

Under that powerful hypnotic command, both Norris and Kincaid turned
their Proxies and fled back up the fissure.

Not until they had reached Base again, not until they had ripped off
the television helmets, did Doug Norris feel that powerful hypnotic
command relax.

"It's as I suspected!" he cried. "It was the Raddies who put that
knowledge in our minds! Who would know nuclear science better than
they?"

Kincaid stared, his jaw dropping. "Then, to stop our bothering them,
they did that by post-hypnotic command working back along our own
Proxy-beams?"

"Yes!" cried Doug Norris. "Ironic, isn't it? They worked back along our
own beams and made Proxies out of _us_!"

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROXY PLANETEERS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
